docs: :memo: add start of the creating resources guide (#810)
seedcase-project/seedcase-sprout: docs/guide/resources.qmd

```

The thing you want to do to your raw data is get it into the data
package to make it easier for yourself and others to use later one. So
the steps we'll take to get this raw data into the structure offered by
Sprout are:

1.  Create the properties for the resource, using the original raw data
    as a starting point and edit as needed.
2.  Create a folder to store the (processed) data resource in our
    package, as well as having a folder for the (tidy) raw data.
3.  Save the properties information and path to the new data resource
    into the `datapackage.json` file.
4.  Re-build the data package's `README.md` file from the updated
    `datapackage.json` file.
5.  If you need to edit the properties at a later point, ideally you do
    it using `edit_resource_properties()` and then re-build the
    `datapackage.json` file.

Before we start, we need to import the Sprout package as well as other
helper packages:

```{python}
import seedcase_sprout.core as sp

# For pretty printing of output
from pprint import pprint

# TODO: This could be a wrapper helper function instead
# To be able to write multiline strings without indentation
from textwrap import dedent
```

> ## Extract, then edit resource properties from raw data

Reviewer: There is already an edit resource section that isn't related to this stage. But I can simplify this to the first section you wrote.

Because the resource's properties are useful for many later functions,
let's first get that created and ready to go. While you can create a
resource properties object manually using `ResourceProperties`, it is
quite intensive and time-consuming. The better and easier approach is to
extract as much information as possible from the raw data to create an
initial resource properties object by using
`extract_resource_properties()`. Then, you can edit the properties as
needed.

Let's start with extracting the resource properties from the raw data.
The function is fairly good at getting and guessing the right

> information, but it is very far from perfect and it just cannot guess
> certain things from the data.

Author: ```suggestion
information, but it is very far from perfect and it cannot guess things that are not in the data itself, like a description of what the data contains or the unit of the data.
```

```{python}

> # Location where the raw data is stored:
> print(raw_data_path)

Author: ```suggestion
```
`raw_data_path` was introduced in the beginning of the guide.

resource_properties = extract_resource_properties(
    data_path=raw_data_path
)
pprint(resource_properties)
```

> You may be able to see that some things are missing, for instance, the

Author: We could also include a `check_resources` here to explicitly show which required fields are missing.

> individual columns (called fields) don't have any descriptions. This we
> have to manually add ourselves. Let's fill in the description for all
> the fields in the resource:

Author: ```suggestion
individual columns (called fields) don't have any descriptions. We have to
manually add this ourselves. 

Let's fill in the description for all
the fields in the resource:
```

```{python}
# TODO: Need to consider/design how editing can be done in an easier, user-friendly way.
# TODO: Add more detail when we know what can and can't be extracted.
```

## Creating a data resource

Now that we have the properties for the resource, we can create the
resource itself within the data package. What this means is that we want

> a folder for the specific resource (since we may have many more data

Author: ```suggestion
a folder for the specific resource (since we may have more data
```

resources to add).

Our package has already been created (using the steps from the [package

> guide](packages.qmd)), with the path set as the variable:

Author: ```suggestion
guide](packages.qmd)), with the path set as the variable `package_path`:
```

```{python}
print(package_path)
```

> We can look inside that path to see:

Author: ```suggestion
We can look inside that path to see the current files and folders:
```

```{python}
print(list(package_path.glob("*")))
```

> Which shows that the `datapackage.json` file and the `README.md` file
> have already been created. So we will create the resource structure in
> this package.

Author: ```suggestion
This shows that the data package already includes a`datapackage.json` file and a `README.md` file. Now, we will create the resource structure in
this package:
```

```{python}
resource_paths=sp.create_resource_structure(
    path=package_path
)
print(resource_paths)
```

> This now has created the folder structure needed and is ready to fill it
> with our raw data! Next, we'll setup the resource properties so that it

Author: ```suggestion
With the the resource folder structure created, we are now ready to fill it
with our raw data! Next, we'll set up the resource properties so that it
```

is ready to be saved into the `datapackage.json` file. We can use the
`path_resource()` helper function to always give us the correct location
to the specific resource's folder path. In this case, our resource is
the first one in the package, so we can use `path_resource(1)`.

```{python}
resource_properties = sp.create_resource_properties(
    properties=resource_properties,
    path=package_path / sp.path_resource(1)
)
pprint(resource_properties)
```

::: callout-tip
If you want to see the list of resources available in your data package
via Python code (rather than looking at it directly in the file system),
you can use the `list_resources()` function.

```{python}
#| eval: false
print(sp.list_resources())
```
:::

> This has setup the properties to be ready to add to the

Author: ```suggestion
This has set up the properties to be ready to add to the
```

good idea to store a backup of the raw data. This is useful if you need
to re-process the data at a later point, troubleshoot any issues, update
incorrect values, or if you need to compare the stored raw data to your
original raw data.

As we showed above, the data is stored in the path that we've set as
`raw_data_path`. We can store this data in the resource's folder by
using:

```{python}
sp.write_resource_data_to_raw(
    data_path=raw_data_path,
    resource_properties=resource_properties
)
```

This function uses the properties object to determine where to store the
raw data, which is in the `raw/` folder of the resource's folder. We can
check the newly added file by using:

```{python}
print(sp.path_resource_raw_files(1))
```

## Building the Parquet data resource file

Now that we've stored the raw data file, we can build the Parquet file
that will be used as the data resource. This Parquet file is built from
the raw data file that we've stored in the resource's folder.

```{python}
parquet_path = sp.build_resource_parquet(
    raw_files=sp.path_resource_raw_files(1),
    path=sp.path_resource_data(1)
)
print(parquet_path)
```

> 

Author: ```suggestion

::: callout-tip
If you add more raw data to the resource later on, you can update this Parquet file to include all data in the raw folder using the `build_resource_parquet()` function like shown above.
:::

```

## Re-building the README file

> One of the last steps to finish with adding a new data resource is to

Author: ```suggestion
One of the last steps to finish adding a new data resource is to
```

re-build the `README.md` file for the data package. To allow some
flexibility with what gets added to the README text, this next function
will only *build the text*, but not write it to the file. This allows
you to add additional information to the README text before writing it
to the file.

```{python}

> readme_text = sp.build_readme_text(

Author: This might just be me who has forgotten, but when do we use `create_` and when do we use `build_`?

Reviewer: No it isn't you. I have an issue open to think about naming hahaha because of this create vs build vs etc haha

    properties=sp.read_properties(package_path / sp.path_properties())
)
```

In this case, we don't want to add anything else, so we'll write the

> README text to the `README.md` file:

Author: ```suggestion 
text to the `README.md` file:
```

```{python}
sp.write_text(
    text=readme_text,

>     # TODO: Make a helper function for this path?

Author: Sounds good to me 👍

    path=package_path / "README.md"
)
```

## Edit resource properties

After having created a resource, you may need to make edits to the
properties. While technically you can do this manually by opening up the
`datapackage.json` file and editing it, we've made these functions to

> help do it in an easier and correct way. Using the

Author: ```suggestion
help do it in an easier way that ensures that the `datapackage.json` is still in a correct json format. Using the
```

---
title: "Creating and managing data resources"
order: 2
jupyter: python3
execute:
  eval: false
---

In each [data package](/docs/design/interface/outputs.qmd) are [data
resources](/docs/design/interface/outputs.qmd), which contain a
conceptually standalone set of data. This page shows you how to create
and manage data resources inside a data package using Sprout. We assume
that a data package has already been [created](packages.qmd).

{{< include _preamble.qmd >}}

::: callout-important
Data resources can only be created from [tidy
data](https://design.seedcase-project.org/data/). Before you can store
it, you need to process it into a tidy format, ideally using Python so
that you have a record of the steps taken to clean and transform the
data.
:::

```{python setup}
#| include: false
# This `setup` code chunk loads packages and prepares the data.
import seedcase_sprout.core as sp
import tempfile
from urllib.request import urlretrieve

> temp_path = tempfile.TemporaryDirectory()
> package_path = sp.create_package_properties(
>     properties=sp.example_package_properties(),
>     path=temp_path / "diabetes-study"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
temp_path = tempfile.TemporaryDirectory()
package_path = temp_path / "diabetes-study"
package_path.mkdir()
package_path = sp.create_package_properties(
    properties=sp.example_package_properties(),
    path=package_path
```

```{python}
#| error: true
print(sp.check_resource_properties(resource_properties))
```

Let's fill in the description for all
the fields in the resource:

```{python}
# TODO: Need to consider/design how editing can be done in an easier, user-friendly way.
# TODO: Add more detail when we know what can and can't be extracted.
```

## Creating a data resource

Now that we have the properties for the resource, we can create the
resource itself within the data package. What this means is that we want
a folder for the specific resource (since we may have more data
resources to add).

Our package has already been created (using the steps from the [package
guide](packages.qmd)), with the path set as the variable `package_path`:

```{python}
print(package_path)
```

We can look inside that path to see the current files and folders:

```{python}
print(list(package_path.glob("*")))
```

This shows that the data package already includes a `datapackage.json` file and a `README.md` file. Now, we will create the resource structure in
this package:

```{python}
resource_paths=sp.create_resource_structure(
    path=package_path
)
print(resource_paths)
```

> With the the resource folder structure created, we are now ready to fill it
> with our raw data! Next, we'll set up the resource properties so that it

Author: ```suggestion
Next, we'll set up the resource properties so that it
```
Think that sentence is a bit premature (we’ll add path to the properties and write them before).

is ready to be saved into the `datapackage.json` file. We can use the

> `path_resource()` helper function to always give us the correct location

Author: Thinking about this, it might make sense to have the `extract_resource_properties()` function *not* save a path. Otherwise, this could be a step that is easily forgotten - and the checks won’t catch it bc it’s not missing What do you think?

Reviewer: Hmm, I'm not sure what you mean here. Could you expand?

to the specific resource's folder path. In this case, our resource is
the first one in the package, so we can use `path_resource(1)`.

```{python}
resource_properties = sp.create_resource_properties(
    properties=resource_properties,
    path=package_path / sp.path_resource(1)
)

> pprint(resource_properties)

Reviewer: Yea, I'm not super happy with the language. `edit_resource_properties()` edits properties *that already exist in the `datapackage.json` file. But those properties haven't been added to the `datapackage.json` file yet, we've only extracted the properties from the raw data.

```

::: callout-tip
If you want to see the list of resources available in your data package
via Python code (rather than looking at it directly in the file system),
you can use the `list_resources()` function.

```{python}
#| eval: false
print(sp.list_resources())
```
:::

This has set up the properties to be ready to add to the
`datapackage.json` file. Next, we save that properties file into the
`datapackage.json` file by writing it to the `datapackage.json` file:

```{python}
sp.write_resource_properties(
    properties=resource_properties,
    path=sp.path_properties()
)
```

We can check the contents of the `datapackage.json` file to see that the
resource properties have been added:

```{python}
pprint(sp.read_properties(package_path / sp.path_properties()))
```

> ## Storing a backup of the raw data

Author: Just a reminder that based on #1078, this section needs an update :)

Author: raw —> batch

Before we start processing the raw data into a Parquet file, it is a

> good idea to store a backup of the raw data. This is useful if you need

Reviewer: I've updated this.

Now that we've stored the raw data file, we can build the Parquet file
that will be used as the data resource. This Parquet file is built from
the raw data file that we've stored in the resource's folder.

```{python}
parquet_path = sp.build_resource_parquet(
    raw_files=sp.path_resource_raw_files(1),
    path=sp.path_resource_data(1)
)
print(parquet_path)
```

::: callout-tip
If you add more raw data to the resource later on, you can update this Parquet file to include all data in the raw folder using the `build_resource_parquet()` function like shown above.
:::

## Re-building the README file

One of the last steps to finish adding a new data resource is to
re-build the `README.md` file for the data package. To allow some
flexibility with what gets added to the README text, this next function
will only *build the text*, but not write it to the file. This allows
you to add additional information to the README text before writing it
to the file.

```{python}
readme_text = sp.build_readme_text(
    properties=sp.read_properties(package_path / sp.path_properties())
)
```

In this case, we don't want to add anything else, so we'll write the

> text to the `README.md` file:

Author: Couldn’t this be a nice to show how this would be done, actually?

Reviewer: I'm not sure what you mean. Could you expand?

```{python}
sp.write_text(
    text=readme_text,
    # TODO: Make a helper function for this path?
    path=package_path / "README.md"
)
```

## Edit resource properties

After having created a resource, you may need to make edits to the
properties. While technically you can do this manually by opening up the
`datapackage.json` file and editing it, we've made these functions to
help do it in an easier way that ensures that the `datapackage.json` is still in a correct json format. Using the
`edit_resource_properties()` function, you give it the path to the
current properties and then create a new `ResourceProperties` object

> with any changes you want to make. Anything in the new properties object

Author: ```suggestion
with the changes you want to make. Anything in the new properties object
```

will be used to build the data resource's parquet file:

```{python}
sp.build_resource_parquet(
    raw_files=sp.path_resource_batch_files(1, path=package_path),
    path=sp.path_resource_data(1, path=package_path)
)
```

::: callout-tip
If you add more raw data to the resource later on, you can update this
Parquet file to include all data in the batch folder using the
`build_resource_parquet()` function like shown above.
:::

## Re-building the README file

One of the last steps to adding a new data resource is to re-build the
`README.md` file for the data package. To allow some flexibility with
what gets added to the README text, this next function will only *build
the text*, but not write it to the file. This allows you to add
additional information to the README text before writing it to the file.

```{python}
readme_text = sp.build_readme_text(
    properties=sp.read_properties(sp.path_properties(path=package_path))
)
```

For this guide, you'll only use the default text and not add anything
else to it. Next you write the text to the `README.md` file by:

```{python}
sp.write_file(
    text=readme_text,
    path=sp.path_readme(path=package_path)
)
```

> ## Edit resource properties

Reviewer 2: Maybe mention that if you change the resource properties and you already have data in the resource, then you may need to redo the "write to batch" and "write to master Parquet file" steps. This is because if you, for example, change a column name, that has to be reflected in the Parquet schema. Or if you change a data type, that column may need to be converted to Parquet differently (e.g. as a `date` instead of a `string`).

Maybe right now we don't know exactly how we want to do this in a user-friendly way, but just so we don't forget.

After having created a resource, you may need to make edits to the
properties. While technically you can do this manually by opening up the
`datapackage.json` file and editing it, we've strongly recommend you use
the functions to do this. These functions help to ensure that the
`datapackage.json` is still in a correct JSON format and have the
correct fields filled in. Using the `edit_resource_properties()`
function, you give it the path to the current properties and then create
a new `ResourceProperties` object with the changes you want to make.
Anything in the new properties object will overwrite fields in the old
properties object. This function does not write back, it only returns
the new properties object.

```{python}
resource_properties = sp.edit_resource_properties(
    path=sp.path_properties(path=package_path),
    properties=sp.ResourceProperties(
        title="Basic characteristics of patients"
    )

> )

Reviewer 2: I know that this function doesn't exist yet, I'm just wondering about its arguments.
Here it takes 1) the path to `datapackage.json` and 2) the updates to make to the target resource properties.
I think this is very much what we want, but we also need to be able to tell which resource properties to update. As resource properties are uniquely identified by their ID, we need to know the ID of the target resource properties.

So either
1. Always specify the data path (which has the ID) in the input resource properties representing the updates to make. This could be enforced by raising an error if the path is missing.
2. Or have a `resource_id` argument to `edit_resource_properties`.

The second option seems less confusing, perhaps?

data.
:::

Putting your raw data into a data package makes it easier for yourself

> and others to use later one. So the steps you'll take to get this raw

Author: ```suggestion
and others to use later one. So the steps you'll take to get your
```
Removing mentions of “raw data” within a resource.

data into the structure offered by Sprout are:

1.  Create the properties for the resource, using the original raw data
    as a starting point and edit as needed.
2.  Create a folder to store the (processed) data resource in your

>     package, as well as having a folder for the (tidy) raw data.

Author: ```suggestion
    package, as well as having a folder for the (tidy) batch data.
```
Remove mentions of “raw data” within a resource.

## Extract resource properties from raw data

You'll start by creating the resource's properties. Before you can have

> data stored in a data package, it needs metadata (called properties) on

Author: ```suggestion
data stored in a data package, it needs properties (i.e., metadata) on
```
I think it makes more sense to have them this way around so we consistently refer to properties and not metadata.

```

You may be able to see that some things are missing, for instance, the
individual columns (called `fields`) don't have any descriptions. You
will have to manually add this yourself. You can run a check on the
properties to confirm what is missing:

```{python}
#| error: true
print(sp.check_resource_properties(resource_properties))
```

Time to fill in the description for all the fields in the resource:

```{python}
# TODO: Need to consider/design how editing can be done in an easier, user-friendly way.
# TODO: Add more detail when we know what can and can't be extracted.
# TODO: Set the path field here?
```

## Creating a data resource

Now that you have the properties for the resource, you can create the
resource itself within the data package. What this means is that you
will create a folder for the specific resource (since you may have more
data resources to add).

> We assume you've already create a package (either by using the steps

Author: ```suggestion
We assume you've already created a package (either by using the steps
```

from the [package guide](packages.qmd) or started making one for your

> own data), with the path set as the variable `package_path`:

Author: ```suggestion
own data), with the path to the data package set as the variable `package_path`:
```

Let's take a look at the current files and folders in the data package:

```{python}
#| echo: false
print(package_path.glob("**/*"))
```

This shows that the data package already includes a `datapackage.json`

> file and a `README.md` file. Now to create the resource structure in
> this package, using the helper `path_resources()` function to give the
> correct path to the resources folder. The default behaviour of

Author: ```suggestion
file and a `README.md` file. Now you’ll add the resource structure to
the package, using the helper function `path_resources()` to give the
correct path to the resources folder. The default behaviour of
```

`path_resources()` is to use the current working directory, but for this

> guide you'll have to use the `path` argument to point to where the

Author: Is this actually “we’ll” here? Bc if they’re following along locally, they should be able to use the cwd, right?

Reviewer 2: And could we not cd into the temp folder we're using in the guide? Then we would be in the same situation as the user and could drop the path argument in the guide.

Reviewer: @martonvago good suggestion about cd'ing into the temp folder. I'll make an issue for that.

package is stored in the temporary folder.

```{python}
# TODO: This doesn't work exactly as expected here. We need to create
# the `resources/` folder first.
sp.create_resource_structure(
    path=sp.path_resources(path=package_path)
)
```

> Next step is to set up the resource properties so that it gets checked
> and saved into the `datapackage.json` file. You can use the

Author: ```suggestion
The next step is to add the resource properties to the `datapackage.json` file. Before they are added, they will be checked to confirm that they are in the correct shape and that no required fields are missing. You can use the
```

Reviewer 3: Would it be an option to say that they are 'valid' instead of the correct shape? I feel like this guide is aimed at people (like me) that are not super familiar with these things, and the shape bit always trips me up.

Reviewer: @K-Beicher I've updated it, want to check it again? Valid is a weird word, but "correctly filled in" is probably more accurate for how you may understand things :relaxed:

Reviewer 3: I like that one!

> `path_properties()` helper function to always give you the correct

Author: ```suggestion
path_properties()` helper function to give you the
```
I feel like “always” is promising too much — what if they give it the wrong path, for instance.

location to the `datapackage.json` path. Here, the `path` argument
points to the temporary folder where the package is stored.

```{python}

> # TODO: This function needs to be updated to write to data package.

Author: ```suggestion
# TODO: This function needs to be updated to write to datapackage.json
```

Reviewer 2: @signekb or @lwjohnst86 , has anyone already looked at this? If not, should I?

Reviewer: @martonvago you can look at it :stuck_out_tongue:
